For that, we are going to use
something known as Go Templates.
Go includes a template framework,
a template is a format that we
use our strings with some kind
of a little language inside,
if you're using Angular, for example,
you know what a template is,
when you define the template,
your HTML file is actually a template.
You can insert a special tags that
are not the HTML within that template,
if you're using React,
JSX is kind of a template.
It's not really formally a template but
kind of, and in Go,
it's not specifically targeting web pages,
you can use it for any string.
But most of the time we use templates for
creating server-side rendering.
This is similar, in case you have
ever played with PHP, for example.
You mix, and I'm talking about playing
vanilla PHP without the framework,
without the templating system.
You write the dot PHP file and
you mix with HTML with PHP
code in the middle, okay?
It's kind of the grandfather
of templating.
Anyway, so in this case,
we're going to create an HTML file
with some Go code in the middle.
Some, it's a template actually, so it's
limited, it's restricted to some ideas.
It's actually in the HTML package, and
the template can include expressions
using double curly braces.
So if you are coming from Angular,
you will feel at home because that's
how interpolation works in Angular.
So you will see this
in action in a second.
Also, there are some options
where you can trim spaces,
I will show you what that means
because it's not completely clear.
We can mix actions and
pipelines as well, this is more complex,
we will just cover the basics,
the fundamentals, but you can call
functions and you can use pipes to define
how the output will look like, okay?
On Angular you also have pipes on
templates that are kind of similar.
So for example, you wanna render a price,
well, you can parse that through A pipe
that will add the currency, the character,
like the dollar sign or the euro sign.
And then you can parse for another pipe
that can format the number with two
digits, and then you can go for another
pipe that can convert into Bitcoin.
So you have a pipeline and
you are parsing that data,
the input for different processes.
So you have that,
you can do if-else not in the Go file,
but in a template and
you can do range for loops.
Okay, so it's like an ng4 for Angular or
when you're doing a map on JSX.
And you can also call functions
that you have on your Go file.
So, let's make one.
So for that,
we're going to create another folder,
I could create the template
in the public folder, but
if I do that, it's going to be
served if someone knows the URL.
So yeah, I don't wanna make that public,
so I can create a new folder.
Maybe we can call that templates and
I can create a template for an index file.
What's the extension for templates?
We don't have one.
Some people are just saying HTML,
some people say dot template,
dot Tmpl, wherever, yeah, it's up to you.
And for example, I will take my index HML
and I will copy and paste my index HML and
I will convert that into a template.
Because it doesn't,
BS code doesn't know what that is.
At least you can, if you save it actually,
if you look at the bottom BS code,
actually saying that this is a gold
template file, so it's recognizing that
we are in Go and that extension is one
of the tension that we typically use,
but you can change that to HTML in
case you wanna see colors again.
That's actually, your change has your IDE.
So it recognizes that file as HTML, or
you can just keep it at as a Go template.
So then it will support,
basically when you open that thing it
can recognize the tags and and so on.
Anyway, I didn't want that.
So, let me just put HTML so
we can see, this.
So as I mentioned,
I'm going to get rid of the script yes, so
we won't have JavaScript,
I don't want JavaScript in this.
I have here an article that I will
use it as some kind of Templates,
okay, so we can kind of feel that thing.
So once idea at any time in this template,
I can open double curly braces and
add an expression.
Typically, what you're going
to do is you're going to
receive an object that
you use here as your,
let's say it's kind of your
source of information, so.
But that's a template, so
it's still empty, right?
How do you use a template?
Well, here we have an example
of how the code looks like,
we're going to write a code anyway.
So, we're training you to create
a new template using Factory.
So template.new from the template package.
Template.new, we set the name,
and then we can parse a template.
What's a template?
A string,
that we can read from the file as well.
So it can be a string that we set
statically or we can read it from a file.
And then at some points,
we will have expressions.
And actually when we execute,
we can execute the template,
we're going to parse an object,
actually a value,
that is going to be used within
the template as the source of data.
And you access that value with the dot.
So if it's a structure, you use dot and
then the name of the property.
In this case,
it's going to take the name of the person.
Does that make sense?
You can execute a template to a string.
So you can receive a string in return.
And you can also write the template
directly to the output of a writer or
for server.
So there are several methods available.
Do you wanna get the string,
that mean the result of a string?
You can use that for
example for sending emails,
you have a template, and
then you can send bulk emails, emailing.
And then you have the template, and the
template can include some kind of logic
inside, such as if conditions and
loops, that's kind of the idea, okay?
So just to play with this,
we are going to back to our goal and
we're going to add another handler.
Let's create the function first,
let's call this handle template.
It's the same as before, we're going to
receive a brighter, so response writer.
And we have also the request,
the http request, handle template,
and we are going to call that
handle template, for example,
we are going to handle that and
we can just for now, for playing with this
as a playground, we can say forward
slash template, handle template.
Okay, so yeah, later we'll replace
that directly with the index HTML.
So you will remove, we will delete
the index HTML from the Public folder and
we will just serve the template version.
So, the first thing that
we're going to do, first,
I can create a template from a string,
okay?
But in this case I'm not going to
create the template as a string.
I'm saying this, I guess you can say,
okay, my template is HTML and
then I'm going to write the name of
the user, but I'm not going to do that for
that I have a file,
an external file, okay?
So instead of doing that,
I'm going to call template.ParseFiles
that is going to do all the file
system thing for me and
I'm going to parse templates/index.tmpl,
and it's going to return
me the HTML template,
let's call it HMTL, and a possible error.
In case the file is not there, we don't
have permissions to read the file or
something like that.
We can validate the template
before trying to use it.
There is a, just to know,
there is a template Must,
where you parse a template,
and it will actually.
It's like a wrapper, so
it's kind of a high order function that
actually verifies if the template
is valid before executing it,
because if you execute a template and
then template is invalid it will
crash your app, it will panic, okay?
So to avoid that we can first go through
Must but I wanna make it simple first.
So if we can actually do something, so if.
Error is not nil is because
we have a problem, okay?
We do have an error, so something that
we can do at this point is we can write.
We do have a Write Header,
in the Write Header we can actually
send an HTTP status quo, so
we can say, for example,
Internal Server Error, that's 500.
Something has happened in our server,
it cannot serve you the file.
And you can also write some text to
the output as well, as slice of byte.
So you can say something like
Internal Server Error, like that?
If not, it's because we do have
the template, okay, so we can use cells or
we can just continue and
maybe call return.
Or, if everything is correct
then I can try to execute,
the template, and
the first argument for execute,
we have execute to a string or
we can execute to the writer.
And what's the writer?
The argument that we will receive here,
the output of the server, and.
We have parsed w there.
And then the object, that we wanna parse,
for example, for now I can just say Test.
I can parse a string, the value that
they want the template to parse, okay?
So, our our index the template has,
this is going to be invalid.
Actually, let's see what
happens if I execute this.
So if I stop my server and run again,
and now I'm going to localhost forward
slash template, I'm receiving
an internal server error, okay?
Why?
Because, the template is invalid.
Because we have that empty expression,
that's why it's not working.
By the way, if you look at the cursor
here, I have a Write Header error,
it's saying me that,
I'm saying the 500 is not working.
Why?
Because I'm sending the Header
after writing content.
And on HTTP, it is a buffer,
the code goes first.
So if you have already sent
somebody to the client,
you cannot change the HTTP code.
Does it make sense?
So if you wanna send that status code,
you need to do it first before
sending any content to the browser.
That's how the HTTP protocol works.
So what if we wanna render that
Test string within the template?
It's kind of weird, it dot.
Dot is actually the value that
you have received as input.
You can see well dot is just that,
what if I wanna parse something else,
like a second, value?
You cannot, it's only one value,
that's the idea.
Well, you can create a structure with
everything you need to parse, or
you can parse in a slice.
Make sense?
Typically, you create an object and
a structure that you parse to the template
and you render for everything.
That makes sense?
In some way shouldn't see that,
WriteHeader error anymore.
So if I refresh, you can see I have my
Test string embedded into the HTML.
So it's actually in the source code
of the HTML, we have that Test string
that is coming from a Go value,
a Go variable, okay, makes sense?
So that's the basics of a template.
It's not a big deal, that dot looks weird,
but at the end you get used to.